---
layout: post
title: Best of 2n - 1
tags:
- combinatorics
- dynamic programming
- hockey
- probability
- Programming
---
It's that time of year again---the NHL Stanley Cup Playoffs. Being Canadian,
I've grown to have a great appreciation for the game, despite not being much of
a sports buff. I play in an intramural league every now and then, seeing it as
a great way to let off some steam. At the professional level, however, the game
becomes a very different sport. I have a tremendous amount of respect for the
abilities of these athletes and the speeds at which they play; it makes for
some very entertaining hockey.

I've always been a bigger fan of playoff games than regular season games, but
perhaps that's just because I enjoy the "elimination" aspect of
tournament-style games. It feels like there's more at stake than your typical
regular season game.

Of course, another interest with hockey---and any game for that
matter---is guessing which team is going to win. While using statistics
about teams to predict the outcome of a series obviously has its limitations, it
is nonetheless an interesting exercise to actually calculate the probability of
a particular team winning a best-of-x series.

# The Problem

Suppose you were able to determine that between teams $A$ and $B$, team $A$ had
probability $p$ of winning a single game against team $B$ (we're going to
assume that this probability does not change over the course of the series). In
a best-of-x series, where $x = 2n - 1$, the first team to win $n$ games
wins the series. From this definition, you might deduce that you can calculate
the chance of team $A$ winning by simply finding $p^n$, hence finding the
chance of team $A$ winning $n$ consecutive games. The problem is that you'd be
incorrect, as team $A$ could just as well lose one or two (in fact, up to $n -
1$) games to team $B$ before eventually emerging victorious.

Thus in order to find the probability of winning, we need to consider all the
possible orderings of wins and losses that result in team $A$ winning. If we
let $k$ be the number of losses, then the number of possible orderings given
$k$ losses would be $n + k - 1$ choose $k$, since we can order the $k$ losses
amongst $n + k - 1$ games (-1 because the last game _has_ to be a win for team
$A$, so we don't consider it in ordering the losses). If we sum over all the
possible outcomes (i.e. team $A$ loses zero times all the way up to $n - 1$
times) and multiply by the respective probabilities of winning and losing, we
have:

$$
\sum_{k = 0}^{n - 1}
\left ( \array{ n + k - 1 \cr k } \right )
\left ( 1 - p \right )^k p^n
$$

# What Does This Have to Do With Programming?

At first glance this doesn't seem terribly interesting, and for all practical
purposes this formula is a perfectly valid solution. However, consider the
situation when $n$ is large---our formula won't be as easily calculable due to
the implicit factorial in the choose operator (especially without a big number
library). We could write an implementation of the choose operator that doesn't
use factorials, but this still won't scale very well (try it). So let's switch
gears a bit, and see if there's a different approach we can take.

Define $F(a, b)$ as the probability that team $A$ will win the series given
that team $A$ needs to win $a$ more games and team $B$ needs to win $b$ more
games. We want to calculate $F(n, n)$, or the probability of team $A$ winning
the series. If we picture $(a, b)$ as a state, there are only two transitions
out of this state: either $A$ wins with probability $p$ (we transition to $(a -
1, b)$), or $B$ wins with probability $1 - p$ (we transition to $(a, b - 1)$).
There are two kinds of states where we know with certainty the probability of
team $A$ winning: states where $A$ has already won ($(0, b)$ for all $b > 0$)
and so $F(0, b) = 1$, or states where $B$ has already won ($(a, 0)$ for all
$a > 0$) and so $F(a, 0) = 0$.

If [dynamic programming][DP] hasn't popped into your mind yet, hopefully mentioning
it now helps click everything into place. We have two base cases, as well as a
way to relate one state to two other states. Thus we can work from the end of
the series where team $A$ has either won or lost, all the way back to the
beginning of the series where neither team has won a game yet. This translates
into a short Python program:

{% highlight python %}
n = int(raw_input("Number of games needed to win series (n): "))
p = float(raw_input("Probability of team A winning a game (p): "))
F = [[0 for b in range(n + 1)] for a in range(n + 1)]

for b in range(1, n + 1):
    F[0][b] = 1

for a in range(1, n + 1):
    for b in range(1, n + 1):
        F[a][b] = p*F[a - 1][b] + (1 - p)*F[a][b - 1]

print F[n][n]
{% endhighlight %}

For large $n$, this approach scales much better, as it runs in $O(n^2)$ time,
and doesn't require any big number libraries---though you'll probably lose a
little bit of precision using standard floating point arithmetic.

So next time you find yourself betting on which team will win a best-of-999
game tournament, remember to use dynamic programming to find the answer faster
than your friends!

[DP]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dynamic_programming
